Update certificate structure with key usage and details of the Golem Factory extension (#66)
golemfactory/golem-architecture: gaps/gap-25_golem_certificates/gap-25_golem_certificates.md

gap: 25
title: Golem Certificates structure
description: Describes certificates usage to enable more sensitive golem features.
author: <Witold Dzięcioł (@nieznanysprawiciel)>, evik (@evik42)
status: Draft
type: Feature
requires: GAP-5, GAP-4
—

## Abstract

> Some Golem features are more sensitive because of potential malicious usage. A good example is outbound network traffic, where a malicious user could cause harm if he was able to access any internet resource. In GAP-5 and GAP-4 we decided to limit Requestor abilities by introducing Computational Manifest which defines allowed commands and domain access. Payload Manifest is signed to confirm that image is safe to use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some Golem features are more sensitive because of potential malicious usage. A good example is outbound network traffic, where a malicious user could cause harm if they were able to access any internet resource. In GAP-5 and GAP-4 we decided to limit Requestor abilities by introducing Computational Manifest which defines allowed commands and domain access. Payload Manifest is signed to confirm that image is safe to use.
```

Outbound network is not the only use case which requires certificates. Soon we will have other cases and we need to unify certificates usage to allow different sets of permissions.

## Motivation

> Golem use cases allowing for interaction with the external world (like outbound, inbound network traffic) put `Providers` in danger of malicious behaviour from the Requestor side. To alleviate this danger, in GAP-5 and GAP-4 we decided to limit Requestor abilities by introducing Computational Manifest which should be signed by a trusted party.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Golem use cases allowing for interaction with the external world (like outbound, inbound network traffic) put `Providers` in danger of malicious behaviour from the Requestor side. To alleviate this danger, in GAP-5 and GAP-4 we decided to limit Requestor abilities by introducing Computational Manifest which may be signed by a trusted party.
```

- KYC
- Inbound network traffic

This means that certificates will be used to sign different kinds of permissions. In case of transferring certification to other companies or signing legal Agreements, we need to ensure that we control which permissions they will be able to use.

> In the future of Golem Network we expect that new, independent features will be implemented by the community and they may need to use certification. This document aims to standardise this approach.

Reviewer: out of curiosity - do we have guidelines that would force us to standardize on British variants? if not, I wouldn't introduce changes that serve only to change the American English spellings to British ones...

## Specification

We decided to use [X.509 Certificate Extensions (Section 4.2)](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/inline-errata/rfc5280.html) to control key usage and permissions in the Golem network.

### Key usage

A certificate can be used to extend the chain of trust via signing other certificates or sign other data that is relevant to the network (for example a Computation Manifest).
To control what a certificate can sign, standard extensions defined in [RFC 5280 Section 4.2.1](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/inline-errata/rfc5280.html) will be used.

Extensions
- Key Usage (OID: joint-iso-ccitt(2) ds(5) 29 15) extension must be marked as critical

> -- Bit `digitalSignature` (0) is used to denote the ability to sign data but not certificates, this is used to grant permission to the signed data.

Reviewer: for me, this sounds a bit awkward. Maybe we could use one of the two variants:

The `digitalSignature` bit (0) ... 

or 

Bit 0 - `digitalSignature` - ...

### Golem Factory certificate extension

This certificate extension is used to grant permissions to a certificate to use certain capabilities of the golem network. Based on how the certificate is intended to be used (defined in the `Key Usage` extension) these permissions or a subset of them can be granted to ‘child’ certificates or other signed data (for example a Requestor identifier).
If this extension is present, it must be marked critical.

When processing this extension, the verifying party will check if the certificate contains all permissions required to fulfil the requested operation. It may ignore all other permission values (including ones it cannot process) as those have no effect on executing the request.

In a chain of certificates a certificate is only valid if the Golem Factory certificate extension contains a subset of the permissions of the signing certificate. The self signed root certificate is always considered to have all permissions even if this extension is not present. This can be limited by settings on the Agent application when setting up trust for the root certificate.

Structure of the Golem Factory certificate extension:
```

> id-gf OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1) private(4) iana(1) 59850 }

Reviewer 2: Yes: https://www.iana.org/assignments/enterprise-numbers/?q=59850

id-gf-certificate OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-gf 1 }
id-gf-certificate-extension OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-gf-certificate 1 }

GolemFactoryCertificateExtension ::= CHOICE {
       permitAll BOOLEAN,
       permissions SEQUENCE SIZE (1..MAX) OF GolemPermissionId

> GolemPermissionID ::= OBJECT IDENTIFIER

Reviewer 3: it would be worth thinking about some permission attributes, e.g. to be able to say that a given certificate allows you to connect to given addresses.

```

> This GAP lists all the Golem permissions IDs, when a new permission is created it should be listed here with the assigned OID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This GAP lists all the Golem permission IDs. When a new permission is created, it should be listed here with the assigned OID.
```

Golem permission ids:
```
id-gf-permission OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-gf 2 }
id-gf-features OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-gf-permissions 1 }

id-gf-manifest-outbound OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-gf-features 1 }
-- Permission to use outbound capabilities with a request defining manifest
```

### Permission chain examples

> If we have hierarchy:

Reviewer: I'd phrase it: "Given a hierarchy"

and then, below start without "then"

> But if structure looks like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the other hand, if structure looks like this:
```

| Certificate           | permissions       |
| --------------------- | ----------------- |
| Golem Root            | all               |
| Golem Intermediate    | inbound           |
| Partner's certificate | manifest-outbound |

then `Partner's certificate` is not allowed to sign manifests and Agent application should reject such Proposals.
Note that the certificate chain is invalid, because `Partner's certificate` shouldn't be signed by `Golem Intermediate` in the first place.

### Limiting certificates chain length

> When Golem Factory signs a certificate with certificate signing capabilities, it could extend the chain of trust indefinitely. In some cases this is not desired, to limit the length of the chain the `pathLenConstraint` field should be used in the `Basic Constraints` extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When Golem Factory signs a certificate with certificate signing capabilities, it could exploited to extend the chain of trust indefinitely. In cases where this is not desired, the `pathLenConstraint` field of the `Basic Constraints` extension can be used to limit the length of the chain.
```

### Are there any existing x509 extensions, that we could use?

Beside the standard extensions mentioned in this document, there is no extension that could host a freely extendable list of permissions.

### Why we need `all` permission?

> Since list of permissions is not exhaustive, we don't want to be forced to change certificates, when adding new features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the list of permissions is not exhaustive, we don't want to be forced to change certificates, when adding new features.
```

> We must keep in mind that `all` permission should be used sparingly only for top level certificates. For sure we shouldn't sign any certificate with `all` permission for external parties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We must keep in mind that `all` permissions should be used sparingly only for top level certificates. Most importantly, we shouldn't sign any certificates with the `all` permission for external parties.
```

### Generating openssl certificate

> TODO: update this part and cert configuration

Reviewer 4: Can this TODO be completed or removed?

```
...
        X509v3 extensions:
            1.3.6.1.4.1.59850.1.1:
                0...all..manifest-outbound
...
```

### Provider Agent changes

> Provider agent supports using certificates without `permission` extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Provider agent supports using certificates without the `permission` extension.
```

We need following changes:

- Certificates chain permissions validation

> - Check outbound permission during negotiations (currently signature is enough)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check the outbound permission during negotiations (currently signature is enough)
```

No changes on the Requestor side are expected.

## Security Considerations

### Old yagna versions

> If we don't implement certificates `permissions` before releasing outbound network, Providers could accept Manifest signatures signed by certificates,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we don't implement certificate `permissions` before releasing the outbound network, Providers could accept Manifest signatures signed by certificates
```

> that don't have `manifest-outbound` permission. This doesn't hurt, as long as we don't introduce new sensitive features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that don't have the `manifest-outbound` permission. This is safe, as long as we don't introduce new, sensitive features.
```
